Pulsar add-on documentation (#661)
CleverCloud/doc.clever-cloud.com: deploy/addon/pulsar.md

---
title: Pulsar
shortdesc: A distributed messaging and streaming platform on the publish/subsribe model
tags:
- addons
keywords:
- pulsar
- messaging
- cold storage
- queue
- hot storage

> - biscuit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- biscuit
- rabbitmq
- kafka
```

Reviewer: As discussed with @cnivolle, we need to have `rabbitmq` & `kafka` keywords around Pulsar ;)

---

## Overview

Pulsar works on a publisher / subscriber model, just like RabbitMQ or Kafka.

```
client               Pulsar             client
publishes to   =>    topic      <=  subscribes to

"producer"                           "consumer"
```

They are several modes of subscription. A consumer may subscribe exclusively, or share the subscription with other consumers.

> - Exclusive

Reviewer: What is this list ?

Reviewer 2: subscription type list, I added clear title.

- Failover (if a consumer fails, another one receives the message)
- Shared (messages are distributed to several consumers)
- Key_Shared (messages come with keys and go to consumers with the corresponding key)

More on this in the [official documentation](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/concepts-messaging/#subscriptions)

A topic is defined this way:

`{persistent|non-persistent}://tenant/namespace/topic`

Tenants and namespaces allow for grouping and subgrouping of topics.

> What a pulsar add-on basically is, is a tenant/namespace pair that allows you to create and use as many topics as you wantt following this pattern:

Reviewer: I find difficult to read that one:
`What a pulsar add-on basically is, is`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What a pulsar add-on basically is, is a tenant/namespace pair that allows you to create and use as many topics as you want following this pattern:
```

`{persistent|non-persistent}://user_id/pulsar_addon_id/name_of_your_topic`

## Authorization

> Pulsar addon uses (Biscuit for Pulsar)[https://github.com/CleverCloud/biscuit-pulsar/commits/master] implementation which is directly pluggable to the Pulsar authentication and authorization system. Each addon exposes its own biscuit token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pulsar add-on uses (Biscuit for Pulsar)[https://github.com/CleverCloud/biscuit-pulsar] implementation which is directly pluggable to the Pulsar authentication and authorization system. Each add-on exposes its own biscuit token.
```

### Usage

> We advise you to use (`pulsarctl`)[https://github.com/streamnative/pulsarctl] provided by StreamNative. Here is an example to list topics in your addon (in your namespace):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We advise you to use (`pulsarctl`)[https://github.com/streamnative/pulsarctl] provided by StreamNative. Here is an example to list topics in your add-on (in your namespace):
```

```bash

> pulsarctl --admin-service-url https://<PULSAR_REST_URL> --auth-params <BISCUIT> --auth-plugin org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.auth.AuthenticationToken topics list <tenant>/<namespace>

Reviewer: You should use the add-on environment variables.

```

As Biscuit is a token, you can use `AuthenticationToken("<BISCUIT>")` provided by clients librairies to authenticate to our clusters without any tweak.

> * C++ client

Reviewer: I think should simply link this page: https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/client-libraries/

* C# client
* Go client
* Java client
* Node.js client
* Python client
* Rust client
* WebSocket client

> ### Operations

Reviewer: These operations might change in the future ?

Reviewer 2: yes

Reviewer: Could you write something about it ? Our customers can reach us through the support to ask new operations ?

> The pulsar addon given biscuit enable you to run several operations on namespace, its policies and the related topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pulsar add-on given biscuit enable you to run several operations on namespace, its policies and the related topics.
```

#### Namespace

Namespace operations authorized:

```
CREATE_TOPIC
GET_TOPIC
GET_TOPICS
DELETE_TOPIC
ADD_BUNDLE
DELETE_BUNDLE
GET_BUNDLE
CLEAR_BACKLOG
UNSUBSCRIBE
```

Namespace policies operations authorized:

```
ALL_READ
ANTY_AFFINITY_READ
BACKLOG_READ
BACKLOG_WRITE
COMPACTION_READ
COMPACTION_WRITE
DELAYED_DELIVERY_READ
DELAYED_DELIVERY_WRITE
DEDUPLICATION_READ
DEDUPLICATION_WRITE
MAX_CONSUMERS_READ
MAX_CONSUMERS_WRITE
MAX_PRODUCERS_READ
MAX_PRODUCERS_WRITE
MAX_UNACKED_READ
MAX_UNACKED_WRITE
OFFLOAD_READ
PERSISTENCE_READ
PERSISTENCE_WRITE
RATE_WRITE
RATE_READ
RETENTION_READ
RETENTION_WRITE
REPLICATION_READ
REPLICATION_RATE_READ
SCHEMA_COMPATIBILITY_STRATEGY_READ
SCHEMA_COMPATIBILITY_STRATEGY_WRITE
SUBSCRIPTION_AUTH_MODE_READ
SUBSCRIPTION_AUTH_MODE_WRITE
ENCRYPTION_READ
ENCRYPTION_WRITE
TTL_READ
TTL_WRITE
```

#### Topics

Topics operations authorized:

```
LOOKUP
PRODUCE
CONSUME
COMPACT
EXPIRE_MESSAGES
OFFLOAD
PEEK_MESSAGES
RESET_CURSOR
SKIP
TERMINATE
SUBSCRIBE
GET_SUBSCRIPTIONS
UNSUBSCRIBE
GET_STATS
```

Topics policies operations authorized:

```
PARTITION_READ
PARTITION_WRITE
```

### Attenuation

> The pulsar addon given biscuit can be attenuated, here is an attenuation example using (biscuit-cli)[https://github.com/biscuit-auth/biscuit-cli] from the given biscuit to produce/consume topics starting with `"TOPIC_PREFIX"`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pulsar add-on given biscuit token can be attenuated, here is an attenuation example using (biscuit-cli)[https://github.com/biscuit-auth/biscuit-cli] from the given biscuit token to produce/consume topics starting with `"TOPIC_PREFIX"`:
```

Reviewer: I think you should give an example to "TOPIC_PREFIX" so we don't assume it is an environment variable.

> First inspect your biscuit:

Reviewer: We might need to tell how to create this file ^^.

```bash

> $ biscuit inspect addon.biscuit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
biscuit inspect addon.biscuit
```

Authority block:
== Datalog ==
right(#authority, #admin);

== Revocation ids ==
Content-based: fe7526a27b43fa7d5386c31b3efb6c53b551b4a8e3e969f4dc074497b3942a57
Unique:        faf6cab8a4dffad77633181d6f924414980bb6d76c5298b88f700c11659c7407

==========

Block n°1:
== Datalog ==
check if topic_operation(#ambient, "user_1235678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_1235678-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $2, $3) or namespace_operation(#ambient, "user_12345668-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_1235678-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $2);

== Revocation ids ==
Content-based: a35a92a278a3ad9ec5db8dc3e905cfbc17f5a8e2cb13ff39b69b003500fe6c46
Unique:        17dfec62b62da36562a0998d496bb3aa30f229138ec810a070084bdf1c55be3a

==========
```

* The authority block is the cluster authentication block (the cluster admin biscuit).
* The block n°1 is an attenuation of the authority block to only authorize operations on `tenant = "user_1235678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89"` and `namespace = "pulsar_1235678-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c"`.

Now attenuate it:

```bash

> $ biscuit attenuate addon.biscuit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
biscuit attenuate addon.biscuit
```

check if topic_operation(#ambient, "user_12345678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_50ee8f69-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $2, $3) or namespace_operation(#ambient, "user_12345678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_12345678-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $2);

== Revocation ids ==
Content-based: a35a92a278a3ad9ec5db8dc3e905cfbc17f5a8e2cb13ff39b69b003500fe6c46
Unique:        17dfec62b62da36562a0998d496bb3aa30f229138ec810a070084bdf1c55be3a

==========

Block n°2:
== Datalog ==
check if topic_operation(#ambient, "user_12345678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_12345678-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $topic, $operation), $topic.starts_with("TOPIC_PREFIX");

== Revocation ids ==
Content-based: 8eaaa639d5b94c3e053ad840e8dcca6fe66a621442ecc99eadf1df03d6138f1d
Unique:        f608dc2f724fc14faf0daf50774ef0b9425cda26f56ee93317ca80ca13736027

==========
```

Now the block n°2 ensure that topics must starts with `"TOPIC_PREFIX"`.

You can find more examples on the (biscuit-pulsar authorization java tests)[https://github.com/CleverCloud/biscuit-pulsar/blob/master/src/test/java/com/clevercloud/biscuitpulsar/AuthorizationProviderBiscuitTest.java].

## Storage

### Retention

> Provided addon pulsar have a infinite retention policies which can be changed using:

Reviewer: What are the impacts of an infinite retention policy on Clever Cloud ?
```suggestion
Provided add-on pulsar have an infinite retention policies which can be changed using:
```

```bash
# Example to set retention of namespace to 2 weeks and/or 100 GB
pulsarctl --admin-service-url https://<PULSAR_REST_URL> --auth-params <BISCUIT> --auth-plugin org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.auth.AuthenticationToken namespaces set-retention <tenant>/<namespace> --time 2w --size 100G
```

### Offload storage to Cellar (S3)

Pulsar has a [tiered storage feature](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/tiered-storage-overview/) allowing to offload heavy data to cold storage once a threshold is reached.

> For each pulsar addon we provide, we also provide an hidden cellar addon (which is our object storage addon) which is directly binded to the pulsar namespace offload policies. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each pulsar add-on we provide, we also provide a hidden Cellar add-on (which is our object storage add-on) which is directly binded to the pulsar namespace offload policies. 
```
You should provide a link to the Cellar add-on page.

---
title: Pulsar
shortdesc: A distributed messaging and streaming platform on the publish/subsribe model
tags:
- addons
keywords:
- pulsar
- messaging
- cold storage
- queue
- hot storage
- biscuit
- rabbitmq
- kafka
---

## Overview

> Pulsar works on a publisher/subscriber model, just like RabbitMQ or Kafka.

Reviewer 3: Could you add a link to Pulsar's website?
```suggestion
[Pulsar](https://pulsar.apache.org/) works on a publisher/subscriber model, just like RabbitMQ or Kafka.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Before talking consuming strategies, we could talk on:

* why are we using pub/sub tech? 
* why do we love event-driven architecture?

Reviewer 2: @PierreZ Can you contribute these points?

Reviewer 2: I've done it on 542d67ed3e05f37baf5ca9b17339323f153998b4 and 1ae3ab7a3b8252957823202075500eed6067c30c.

#### Namespace

Namespace operations authorized:

```
CREATE_TOPIC
GET_TOPIC
GET_TOPICS
DELETE_TOPIC
ADD_BUNDLE
DELETE_BUNDLE
GET_BUNDLE
CLEAR_BACKLOG
UNSUBSCRIBE
```

Namespace policies operations authorized:

```
ALL_READ
ANTY_AFFINITY_READ
BACKLOG_READ
BACKLOG_WRITE
COMPACTION_READ
COMPACTION_WRITE
DELAYED_DELIVERY_READ
DELAYED_DELIVERY_WRITE
DEDUPLICATION_READ
DEDUPLICATION_WRITE
MAX_CONSUMERS_READ
MAX_CONSUMERS_WRITE
MAX_PRODUCERS_READ
MAX_PRODUCERS_WRITE
MAX_UNACKED_READ
MAX_UNACKED_WRITE
OFFLOAD_READ
PERSISTENCE_READ
PERSISTENCE_WRITE
RATE_WRITE
RATE_READ
RETENTION_READ
RETENTION_WRITE
REPLICATION_READ
REPLICATION_RATE_READ
SCHEMA_COMPATIBILITY_STRATEGY_READ
SCHEMA_COMPATIBILITY_STRATEGY_WRITE
SUBSCRIPTION_AUTH_MODE_READ
SUBSCRIPTION_AUTH_MODE_WRITE
ENCRYPTION_READ
ENCRYPTION_WRITE
TTL_READ
TTL_WRITE
```

#### Topics

Topics operations authorized:

```
LOOKUP
PRODUCE
CONSUME
COMPACT
EXPIRE_MESSAGES
OFFLOAD
PEEK_MESSAGES
RESET_CURSOR
SKIP
TERMINATE
SUBSCRIBE
GET_SUBSCRIPTIONS
UNSUBSCRIBE
GET_STATS
```

Topics policies operations authorized:

```
PARTITION_READ
PARTITION_WRITE
```

### Attenuation

> The Pulsar add-on given Biscuit token can be attenuated, here is an attenuation example using (biscuit-cli)[https://github.com/biscuit-auth/biscuit-cli] from the given Biscuit token to produce/consume topics starting with `"TOPIC_PREFIX"`:

Reviewer 3: Could you add an attenuation example?

For example, "I want to derive a biscuit from the one I have that can only read data"

Author: I think the attenuation example is already provided.

Reviewer 2: It is.

```
client               Pulsar             client
publishes to   =>    topic      <=  subscribes to

"producer"                           "consumer"
```

They are several modes of subscription. A consumer may subscribe exclusively, or share the subscription with other consumers. There is the subscription mode types:

- Exclusive (only one consumer for the subscription)
- Failover (if a consumer fails, another one receives the message)
- Shared (messages are distributed to several consumers)
- Key_Shared (messages come with keys and go to consumers with the corresponding key)

More on this in the [official documentation](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/concepts-messaging/#subscriptions).

A topic is defined this way:

`{persistent|non-persistent}://tenant/namespace/topic`

Tenants and namespaces allow for grouping and subgrouping of topics.

> A Clever Cloud Pulsar add-on is basically a immutable `tenant/namespace` where the tenant is your user id, and the namespace is the add-on id.

Reviewer 4: `an immutable`?

It allows you to create and use topics following this pattern:

`{persistent|non-persistent}://<CLEVERCLOUD_TENANT_ID>/<ADDON_ID>/<TOPIC_NAME>`

## Version

We maintain up-to-date Pulsar clusters based on the official Apache Pulsar release process. Your Pulsar add-on version is available in your add-on dashboard. Updates will be notified using Clever Cloud weekly updates on the [blog](https://www.clever-cloud.com/blog/).

> ## Common use cases

Reviewer 4: Almost of the items of the list use a different "example" pattern. Maybe make all the elements like:
`- <example>: explain it`

Reviewer 2: Well no, it is too complicated to make generic as some are parts of other etc.

> * Ingestion user interaction and server events To make use of user interaction events from end-user apps or server events from your system, you may forward them to Pulsar and then use a stream processing tool which delivers them to your applications. Pulsar allows you to gather events from many clients simultaneously.

Reviewer 4: I can't really understand this sentence, am I the only one?

* Replicating data among databases using [Pulsar IO](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/io-overview/) is commonly used to distribute change events from databases.

> * Parallel processing and workflows. You can efficiently distribute a large number of tasks among multiple workers ( compressing text files, sending email notifications).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Parallel processing and workflows. You can efficiently distribute a large number of tasks among multiple workers (compressing text files, sending email notifications).
```

* Data streaming from IoT devices. For example, a residential sensor can stream data to backend servers.
* Refreshing distributed caches. For example, an application can publish invalidation events to update the IDs of objects that have changed.
* Real-time event distribution Events, raw or processed, may be made available to multiple applications across your team and organization for real time processing.

> ## Create an add-on

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Create a Pulsar add-on
```

It is as simple and straightforward as creating any other add-on.
In your personnal space, click on *Create* > *an add-on* > *Pulsar*.
Choose your plan, link an app to it (or not), give it a name and a zone, and it's done.

## Authorization

Pulsar add-on uses [Biscuit for Pulsar](https://github.com/CleverCloud/biscuit-pulsar) implementation which is directly pluggable to the Pulsar authentication and authorization system. Each add-on exposes its own Biscuit token.

### Attenuation

> The Pulsar add-on given Biscuit token can be attenuated, here is an attenuation example using [biscuit-cli](https://github.com/biscuit-auth/biscuit-cli) from the given Biscuit token to produce/consume topics starting with a custom topic prefix called `"my-own-prefix"`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Biscuit provided by a pulsar add-on can be attenuated. Here is an attenuation example using [biscuit-cli](https://github.com/biscuit-auth/biscuit-cli) to produce/consume topics starting with a custom topic prefix called `"my-own-prefix"`.
```

Also, should Biscuit put between back ticks? `Biscuit`

> Put your Biscuit token in a file:

Reviewer 4: Write your biscuit token?

```bash
Authority block:
== Datalog ==
right(#authority, #admin);

== Revocation ids ==
Content-based: fe7526a27b43fa7d5386c31b3efb6c53b551b4a8e3e969f4dc074497b3942a57
Unique:        faf6cab8a4dffad77633181d6f924414980bb6d76c5298b88f700c11659c7407

==========

Block n°1:
== Datalog ==
check if topic_operation(#ambient, "user_12345678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_50ee8f69-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $2, $3) or namespace_operation(#ambient, "user_12345678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_12345678-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $2);

== Revocation ids ==
Content-based: a35a92a278a3ad9ec5db8dc3e905cfbc17f5a8e2cb13ff39b69b003500fe6c46
Unique:        17dfec62b62da36562a0998d496bb3aa30f229138ec810a070084bdf1c55be3a

==========

Block n°2:
== Datalog ==
check if topic_operation(#ambient, "user_12345678-f54e-4e09-848c-1953af6e3e89", "pulsar_12345678-6b36-4af2-be1f-d97862c0c41c", $topic, $operation), $topic.starts_with("my-own-prefix");

== Revocation ids ==
Content-based: 8eaaa639d5b94c3e053ad840e8dcca6fe66a621442ecc99eadf1df03d6138f1d
Unique:        f608dc2f724fc14faf0daf50774ef0b9425cda26f56ee93317ca80ca13736027

==========
```

> Now the block n°2 ensure that topics must starts with `"my-own-prefix"`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now the block n°2 ensures that topics must start with `"my-own-prefix"`.
```

You can find more examples on the [biscuit-pulsar authorization java tests](https://github.com/CleverCloud/biscuit-pulsar/blob/master/src/test/java/com/clevercloud/biscuitpulsar/AuthorizationProviderBiscuitTest.java).

## Usage

We advise you to use [`pulsarctl`](https://github.com/streamnative/pulsarctl) provided by StreamNative. Here is an example to list topics in your add-on (in your namespace):

```bash
pulsarctl --admin-service-url $ADDON_PULSAR_HTTP_URL \\
          --auth-params $ADDON_PULSAR_TOKEN \\
          --auth-plugin org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.auth.AuthenticationToken \\
          topics list $ADDON_PULSAR_TENANT/$ADDON_PULSAR_NAMESPACE
```

> As Biscuit is a token, you can use `AuthenticationToken($ADDON_PULSAR_TOKEN)` provided by [clients libraries](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/client-libraries/) to authenticate to our clusters without any tweak.

Reviewer 4: I think this should go at the end of the `## Authorization` section, before the `### Attenuation` one

      }),
      ..Default::default()
    })
    .build()
    .await?;

  producer
    .send(TestData {
        data: "Hello world!".to_string(),
    })
    .await?;

  Ok(())
}
```

### Java example

There is an official [Java Pulsar Client](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/client-libraries-java/), import it in your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>org.apache.pulsar</groupId>
  <artifactId>pulsar-client</artifactId>
  <version>2.8.0</version>
</dependency>
```

```java
PulsarClient client = PulsarClient.builder()
  .authentication(new AuthenticationToken("ADDON_PULSAR_TOKEN"))
  .serviceUrl("ADDON_PULSAR_BINARY_URL")
  .build();

String TOPIC = "non-persistent://{}/{}/my-own-topic"

Producer<String> producer = client.newProducer(Schema.STRING)
  .topic(TOPIC)
  .create();

  producer.send("Hello world!");

Consumer consumer = client.newConsumer()
  .topics(Arrays.asList(TOPIC))
  .consumerName("my-consumer-name")
  .subscriptionName("my-subscription-name")
  .subscriptionInitialPosition(SubscriptionInitialPosition.Earliest)
  .subscribe();

while (!consumer.hasReachedEndOfTopic()) {
  Message<String> msg = consumer.receive();
  // Got the message!
}
```

### Operations

> The pulsar addon given Biscuit token enables you to run several operations on namespace, its policies and the related topics.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Biscuit token provided by the Pulsar add-on allows you to run several operations on namespace, its policies and the related topics.
```

> These operations might change in the future. Don't hesitate to call our support to ask for new operations!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
These operations might change in the future. Don't hesitate to write to our support to ask for new operations!
```

MAX_PRODUCERS_READ
MAX_PRODUCERS_WRITE
MAX_UNACKED_READ
MAX_UNACKED_WRITE
OFFLOAD_READ
PERSISTENCE_READ
PERSISTENCE_WRITE
RATE_WRITE
RATE_READ
RETENTION_READ
RETENTION_WRITE
REPLICATION_READ
REPLICATION_RATE_READ
SCHEMA_COMPATIBILITY_STRATEGY_READ
SCHEMA_COMPATIBILITY_STRATEGY_WRITE
SUBSCRIPTION_AUTH_MODE_READ
SUBSCRIPTION_AUTH_MODE_WRITE
ENCRYPTION_READ
ENCRYPTION_WRITE
TTL_READ
TTL_WRITE
```

#### Topics

Authorized topics operations:

```
LOOKUP
PRODUCE
CONSUME
COMPACT
EXPIRE_MESSAGES
OFFLOAD
PEEK_MESSAGES
RESET_CURSOR
SKIP
TERMINATE
SUBSCRIBE
GET_SUBSCRIPTIONS
UNSUBSCRIBE
GET_STATS
```

Authorized topics policies operations:

```
PARTITION_READ
PARTITION_WRITE
```

## Storage

### Retention

A Pulsar add-on is provided with infinite retention policies, which can be changed using:

```bash
# Example to set retention of namespace to 2 weeks and/or 100 GB
pulsarctl --admin-service-url $ADDON_PULSAR_HTTP_URL \\
          --auth-params $ADDON_PULSAR_TOKEN \\
          --auth-plugin org.apache.pulsar.client.impl.auth.AuthenticationToken \\
          namespaces set-retention $ADDON_PULSAR_TENANT/$ADDON_PULSAR_NAMESPACE --time 2w --size 100G
```

### Offload storage to Cellar (S3)

> Pulsar has a [tiered storage feature](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/tiered-storage-overview/) allowing to offload heavy data to cold storage once a threshold is reached.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Pulsar has a [tiered storage feature](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/en/tiered-storage-overview/) allowing offload of heavy data to cold storage once a threshold is reached.
```

> For each Pulsar add-on we provide, we also provide an hidden [Cellar add-on](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/deploy/addon/cellar/) (which is our object storage addon) which is directly binded to the Pulsar namespace offload policies.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For each Pulsar add-on we provide, we also provide a hidden [Cellar add-on]({{< ref "deploy/addon/cellar.md" >}}), our object storage add-on. This Cellar add-on is bound to the Pulsar namespace offload policies and will store your offloaded data.
```
